===== Minutes from second CPMLS meeting, December 15, 2015 =====


=== Present board members: ===
Andreas A, Michele C, Morten HJ, Grete SD, Katrine L, Joakim S,  Kent-Andre M, Arne BH, Geir D, Knut M, and Marte Julie S, Tom A
Excused: Anders MS, Hans Petter L and Marianne F

=== Invited ===
Simon Funke (IFI)


=== Agenda ===
 o Welcome, coffee and light refreshments
 o Approval of agenda and minutes from previous meeting
 o Discussion of additional learning outcomes and admission criteria with an eye on specific study directions
 o Cost analysis: Andreas will present how the sharing of expenses and teaching and other issues have been resolved by the ElDat program 
 o Start discussion of courses and/or modules to be developed: 
 o Start defining potential teachers and supervisors as well as external partners
 o Additional topics


=== Minutes ===
After welcoming words and introductions, 
the present members approved the agenda and the minutes from the previous meeting.

After the introductory words, a more general discussion of the
learning outcomes followed.  It was stated that we need to to develop
an identity for the program.  It is meant to be a multidisciplinary
program. It is not a math, or chemistry or physics program. In
recruiting there will be obvious and less obvious sociological
barriers which may influence the way students (and our colleagues)
perceive this MSc program.

It was agreed that the various subgroups, representing the different
departments, will carefully review the learning outcomes and define
additional ones which pertain to the specific discipline. It was
already agreed that we should as soon as possible define our specific
study directions (studieretninger).  The study direction will appear
on the final Master diploma. See below for possible study directions
and examples of naming on final diploma.  Study directions will also
be visible on the webiste of the Master program and different study
directions are also allowed to have different admission criteria.  

We settled for February 15 as our internal deadline.  The different study
directions are then expected to have revised the learning outcomes.

The internal deadline for the MN-fac is March 1, and the all university deadline is
April 1. 

For the discussion of courses, modules and cross-departamental
collaborations on MSc thesis projects, Andreas A presented the way
this has been implemented in the Eldat program. This program is a
collaboration between Physics and Informatics. Andreas pointed to
several points we need to keep in mind for our further discussions and
plans.  
* For a course which is labeled as for example Mat-Infxxxx,
the means which follow the number of credits being produced are
allocated at the department which has the first abbreviation. For this
case, the department of Mathematics gets all means that follow the
produced credits.  
* Co-supervision of a master thesis: the means
which follow the produced credits are shared between departments if
there are supervisors from different department.
* Internal examiners (internsensor): The internal examiner is chosen from the field
of the student and preferentially from the department responsible for the study direction.


It was agreed that every study direction should discuss the courses
(and possible modules to propose) after we are done with the learning
outcomes. The deadline for the work on courses/modules as well as
potential teachers was set to June 30.


As stated above, each study direction can define additional learning
outcomes and even admission criteria. The website of the program will also reflect
the different study direction. 

It was agreed that from the original list of proposed directions
* Computational mathematics
* Computational mechanics and fluid mechanics 
* Computational chemistry
* Computational physics
* Computational materials science
* Computational life science
* Computational informatics
* Image analysis and signal processing
* Computational finance and statistics 
* Computational geoscience

that these can be reduced to fewer ones. For IBV, Physics and Chemistry, the study directions are simple, 
Computational Chemistry
Computational Physics
Computational Life Science

The department of Mathematics and the department of Informatics will
discuss internally which study directions will be offered. It was also proposed that 
computational materials science can be absorbed in the computational physics and chemistry
directions. 

An important issue we need to decide upon by the end of year is the name of the program.
There was a consensus during the meeting that the name should be

COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE (CS).

It means that a physics student who enlists for this program gets an MSc degree
with title 

MSc in  Computational Science: Computational Physics

From which department students enlist is something we should also keep in mind. 


Additional topics: 

* Simon Funke from IFI was proposed as an additional member, and Krister Stræte as an additional student representative. Krister has expressed a clear interest in contributing as student representative. If there are objections please voice these.

* Morten HJ expressed also the possibility to start searching for external partners. 
Morten HJ visited the Bank of Norway on Thursday the 17th of December and met with the head (Sigvald Øen Hansen) of the Risk Analytics group, as well as with a former computational physics student who works in the same group (Maxim Kartamyshev).   There was a clear interest in our program, and an expressed wish to participate if possible.

If there is a general interest, we should start contacting partners in both the public and the private sector, in order to show potential students a large spectrum of potential employers and Master thesis projects/supervisors. Many of these partners could even end up as possible sponsors of this program. 


Best wishes to you all for a happy holiday season and all the best for 2016.

Morten HJ










